A good workman is known by his tools.
A likely story indeed!
And how else can it be?
And yesterday things went on just as usual.
Are you content now?
As if I would talk on such a subject!
Be here now.
Be nice.
But what am I to do?
Come, there's no use in crying like that!
Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
Does YOUR watch tell you what year it is?
Don't panic.
Even while the earth sleeps we travel.
Explain yourself!
Forever is composed of nows.
Have you guessed the riddle yet?
How puzzling all these changes are!
I can see you're trying to invent something!
I shall never get to twenty at that rate!
I wonder if I've been changed in the night?
I wonder what they'll do next!
I've something important to say!
Is that all?
It's always six o'clock now.
Let it go.
Let your best be for your friend.
Listen.
Make a wish, it might come true.
Mine is a long and a sad tale!
Much of your pain is self-chosen.
Oh dear!
Oh, I beg your pardon!
Pay attention.
Reply hazy, ask again later.
Silence all round, if you please!
Someone is speaking well of you.
Stop this moment, I tell you!
Stretch.
Success is a poor teacher.
Take a breath.
That WAS a narrow escape!
The ocean laughs always with the innocent.
The time is right to make new friends.
There is no place like home.
There ought to be a book written about me!
Think about what you're doing.
This message was left intentionally blank.
Today is the tomorrow you worried about yesterday.
Today is what happened to yesterday.
Was I the same when I got up this morning?
What WILL become of me?
What are you thinking of?
What day of the month is it?
What else have you got in your pocket?
What happened last night can happen again.
What size do you want to be?
What we think, we become.
Who ever saw one that size?
Why seek you the unattainable?
Why, it fills the whole window!
Work is love made visible.
You're enough to try the patience of an oyster!
Your daily life is your religion.
Your friend is your needs answered.
Your house is your larger body.
Your joy is your sorrow unmasked.
Go placidly amid the noise and the haste.
Remember what peace there may be in silence.
As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons.
Speak your truth quietly and clearly; and listen to others.
Avoid loud and aggressive persons; they are vexatious to the spirit.
If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain or bitter.
Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans.
Keep interested in your own career, however humble.
Exercise caution in your business affairs, for the world is full of trickery.
Be yourself. Especially do not feign affection.
Take kindly the counsel of the years, gracefully surrendering the things of youth.
Nurture strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune.
Do not distress yourself with dark imaginings.
Many fears are born of fatigue and loneliness.
Beyond a wholesome discipline, be gentle with yourself.
You are a child of the universe no less than the trees and the stars.
You have a right to be here.
No doubt the universe is unfolding as it should.
Be at peace with God, whatever you conceive Him to be.
With all its sham, drudgery and broken dreams, it is still a beautiful world.
Be cheerful.
Strive to be happy.
